= Kamala_Harris_2024_presidential_campaign =

Kamala Harris, the 49th and incumbent vice president of the United States, announced her 2024 campaign for president on July 21, 2024, after incumbent President Joe Biden withdrew his bid for reelection and endorsed her earlier the same day. Harris became the official nominee of the Democratic Party on August 5 following a virtual roll call vote; she selected Minnesota governor Tim Walz as her running mate the following day.
Harris rose to national prominence in 2016 during her campaign for the United States Senate. She became more widely known when she sought the party's nomination for the 2020 presidential election but withdrew from the race in 2019, citing a lack of funds. She endorsed Joe Biden and was chosen to be his running mate in 2020. After Biden and Harris won the general election, she became the first female vice president of the United States upon her inauguration in 2021.
Harris advocates a similar domestic platform to Biden on some issues, supporting national abortion protections, LGBT+ rights, gun control,  and legislation to address climate change. She also supports federal cannabis legalization, strengthening voting rights, strengthening the Affordable Care Act, and federal funding of housing. Harris has departed from Biden on economic issues, proposing what has been described as a "populist" economic agenda, supporting a ban on grocery and food price gouging, capping prescription drug costs, and expanding the child tax credit. On foreign policy, she supports continued military aid to Ukraine and Israel in their respective wars, but insists that Israel must agree to a ceasefire and hostage deal and work towards a two-state solution. On immigration, Harris supports increasing the number of Border Patrol agents and reforming the immigration system.
A debate between Harris and Trump was held on September 10 on ABC, and a vice presidential debate is set for October 1 on CBS.


== Delegate endorsements ==
On July 22, Harris secured enough delegate endorsements to become the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, and officially became the party's nominee after a formal roll call vote, held from August 1 to August 5.


== Background ==

Harris began an initial run for the presidency in January 21, 2019, at the time as U.S. senator from California. In debates, Harris was criticized by opponents over her record as Attorney General of California, notably regarding her past positions on marijuana, cash bail, parole reform, and alleged negligence in investigating police misconduct, among other issues. Stagnant polling and fundraising struggles in November began to signify a possible end to her campaign. Given inconsistencies in staffing, a lack of funds, and a generally poorly managed campaign, she officially withdrew from the Democratic primaries in December 2019. She endorsed Joe Biden on March 8, 2020, and was chosen by Biden to be his running mate on August 11, 2020. After Biden and Harris won the general election, she became the first female vice president of the United States upon her inauguration on January 20, 2021.
In October 2023, Harris refused to speculate about what would happen if Biden, the incumbent president and expected Democratic nominee for the 2024 presidential election, were to drop out of the race. Joe Biden's age, which at the time was 80, was being used as a "battering ram" by Republicans. After the first presidential debate on June 27, 2024, concerns grew about then-presumptive nominee Biden's age and fitness to serve a second term. Biden initially pushed back "aggressively" at the idea that he should drop out. On June 28, New York magazine wrote that while most Democrats did not want Harris to replace him, she would be the most likely choice if he were to drop out; she had higher approval ratings than Biden and other Democratic contenders for the 2028 presidential election, like Gavin Newsom.
On social media, an old clip of Harris asking an audience: "You think you just fell out of a coconut tree? You exist in the context of all in which you live and what came before you," became an Internet meme; coconuts would become a symbol of Harris's campaign and boosted enthusiasm for her being the nominee. "What can be, unburdened by what has been," has similarly surfaced as a meme associated with Harris and her campaign.
By July 3, Harris was being discussed as Biden's potential replacement by senior Democrats, and various Democrats' reactions to the choice ranged from "acceptance to trepidation to resignation". She defended Biden, saying that the debate "wasn't his finest hour" but that "the outcome of this election cannot be determined by one day in June." Nonetheless, her allies began to strategize on how to make her the Democratic choice if he dropped out. She was a frequent target of speeches during the 2024 Republican National Convention from July 15 to 18, with speakers frequently referring to the "Biden-Harris" presidency. On July 17, the campaign for Donald Trump, the Republican candidate in the election, refused to select a date for a vice presidential debate with JD Vance, Trump's running mate, saying that it was unclear who the Democrats' vice presidential nominee would be if Biden were to withdraw.

On July 18, The Hill reported that in the next few days, Biden would make a speech about the future of his political career, and that congressional Democrats expected Harris to be the new nominee. By July 19, Democrats were "quietly mapping" how Harris would win in the election, but other candidates such as Gretchen Whitmer and Josh Shapiro were also being considered. Following pressure from Democrats, Biden withdrew from the election on July 21, 2024, and endorsed Harris as his successor.


== Campaign ==


=== Announcement ===

On July 21, 2024, Harris announced her intention to run for the Democratic nomination, and the "Biden for President" campaign committee filed paperwork with the Federal Election Commission to change the name of the committee to "Harris for President".


=== Presumptive nominee ===
On July 22, Harris received enough state delegate endorsements to win the nomination and become the presumptive nominee. While the endorsements were non-binding, CNN estimated on July 23 she had secured enough delegates to win the nomination.


=== Fundraising ===
The day Biden's withdrawal was announced, Democratic fundraising platform ActBlue reported raising more than $50 million, its largest donation day since Ruth Bader Ginsburg's death in 2020. In the first 24 hours of Harris's candidacy, the presidential campaign raised $81 million in small-dollar donations, the highest single-day total of any presidential candidate in history. By August 1, ten days after the launch of the campaign, the Harris campaign raised $310 million in small-dollar donations through ActBlue.
A number of grassroots fundraising groups were established and held virtual organizing calls, including White Dudes for Harris, South Asian Women for Harris, Latinas for Harris, Native Women + Two Spirit for Harris, Women for Harris, Caribbean-Americans for Harris, Filipino Americans for Harris, Disabled Voters for Harris, Win With Black Women, Win With Black Men, and White Women: Answer the Call (which was the largest Zoom call in history).
In the 24 hours after announcing Tim Walz as Harris's running mate, the campaign raised $36 million.
Harris and Walz held a private fundraiser at the Fairmont in San Francisco on August 11; the 700 attendees raised $12 million and included John Doerr, Reid Hoffman, and Tom Steyer.
During the week of August 12, Walz headlined a string of private fundraisers in Orange County, California; Providence, Rhode Island; Boston; Denver; and Southampton, New York.
Doug Emhoff, Harris' husband, spoke at private fundraisers in the New York City area on August 26 and 27, in Water Mill, North Haven (at the home of Richard C. Perry) and Manhattan.


=== Music ===
Harris is using Beyoncé's song "Freedom" as the official song for her campaign, having obtained permission from Parkwood Entertainment on the day of her first rally. On August 20, 2024, Republican Party presidential primaries spokesperson Steven Cheung posted on Twitter a 13-second video of Trump’s arrival in Detroit, Michigan, for a rally using "Freedom". The following day Beyoncé's record label and music publisher sent a cease-and-desist to Trump for using the song without permission. After Walz was introduced as her running mate, the campaign initially used Bruce Springsteen's "Born to Run" as his walk-on music at rallies, but later began using John Mellencamp's "Small Town" instead by August 13. In August 2024, after Trump used the Foo Fighters song "My Hero" at the rally without permission and against their wishes, they released a statement that any increased royalties from its usage would be donated directly to the Harris 2024 presidential campaign.


=== Advertising ===

A digital ad featuring Beyoncé's song "Freedom" debuted on July 25. On August 8, the Harris campaign released an ad in both English and Spanish, titled "Determination", directed towards Latino voters in battleground states. The next day, another ad called "Tougher" focused on the southern border was released, calling Harris a "border-state prosecutor".


=== Advisers and staff ===

Compared with the Biden campaign's group of advisers and confidants, Harris relies on a larger and more diverse group.
Julie Chávez Rodriguez serves as campaign manager. Jen O'Malley Dillon, who was Biden's campaign chairwoman, was kept on in the same role by Harris; Jeffrey Katzenberg, Mitch Landrieu, Cedric Richmond, and Gretchen Whitmer are co-chairs. Harris also brought on Obama-era adviser David Plouffe.
Lorraine Voles, Harris's chief of staff, was a deputy press secretary for Bill Clinton and is a friend of Ron Klain; after joining the office of the Vice President in 2021, Voles helped facilitate communication between Harris's office and the West Wing, and she is seen as a likely choice to oversee a potential presidential transition. Philip H. Gordon is national security adviser, Sheila Nix is campaign chief of staff, Quentin Fulks is deputy campaign manager, and former Obama speechwriter Adam Frankel led preparations for Harris's DNC speech. The campaign's communications strategy is overseen by Brian Fallon, Ian Sams, and Kirsten Allen, who is focused on Harris's public image. Stephanie Cutter worked on DNC programming; Brian E. Nelson is the campaign's senior adviser for policy; and Sean Clegg, Karen Dunn, and Rohini Kosoglu are helping with debate preparation. (Philippe Reines is portraying Trump.)
Additionally, Harris relies on family — including her husband Doug Emhoff, sister Maya Harris, and brother-in-law Tony West — as well as close friends, such as Chrisette Hudlin, who set Harris up with Emhoff on a blind date, and Minyon Moore, who originally recommended Harris as VP to Biden.


== Campaign events ==

Harris held her first campaign rally on July 23, 2024, at the West Allis Central High School gymnasium in West Allis, Wisconsin; the Republican National Convention had been held a week earlier in nearby Milwaukee. The event reportedly grew a larger audience than any event held by Biden's 2024 campaign, according to campaign spokesperson Kevin Muñoz, who had previously expected around 3,000 people to attend.
On July 30, Harris held an event in Atlanta at Georgia State University's convocation center, telling the crowd of 8,000 people, "Well Donald ... Meet me on the debate stage. ... If you've got something to say, say it to my face." Megan Thee Stallion and Quavo also attended the rally, with Megan Thee Stallion performing several songs and addressing reproductive rights and Quavo speaking about his and Harris's gun violence prevention work.
Harris's first rally featuring her running mate, Tim Walz, was held in Philadelphia at Temple University's Liacouras Center on August 6. The campaign said that 12,000 people attended. The next day, Harris and Walz held rallies in Eau Claire, Wisconsin and Romulus, Michigan.
An event scheduled for August 8 in Raleigh, North Carolina was postponed due to Hurricane Debby, as was a planned rally in Savannah, Georgia on August 9. Harris and Walz instead spoke on August 8 in Wayne, Michigan to UAW Local 900, representing workers at Ford's Michigan Assembly Plant, alongside Shawn Fain.

Harris and Walz appeared on August 9 in Glendale, Arizona at Desert Diamond Arena; U.S. senator Mark Kelly, Arizona attorney general Kris Mayes, U.S. Senate candidate Ruben Gallego (AZ-3), and Republican Mesa mayor John Giles also spoke. Another rally took place the following day in Paradise, Nevada, at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas's Thomas & Mack Center. Before the rally started hundreds of people who wanted to attend the rally were turned away because the venue had reached its capacity. The capacity of the venue is about 18,000 people. According to the campaign, 14,000 people were in the arena and law enforcement closed the doors around 5:45 PM as people who were waiting in line outside became ill. The campaign estimated that 4,000 people were either waiting in line or in their cars when law enforcement closed the doors.
On August 13, Walz spoke at the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees union convention in Los Angeles, and he held a solo rally at the Astro Theater in La Vista, Nebraska, just outside of Omaha, on August 17.
Harris spoke about her economic platform on August 16 at Wake Technical Community College in Raleigh, North Carolina.
The campaign returned to Georgia for a bus tour on August 28, with Harris and Walz visiting Liberty County High School in Hinesville and a barbecue restaurant in Savannah.


=== "I'm speaking" incident ===
At a rally at Detroit Metropolitan Airport on August 7, Harris was heckled by pro-Palestine protestors, who disrupted the event by chanting, "Kamala, Kamala, you can't hide, we won't vote for genocide!" She responded by saying, "I'm here because we believe in democracy. Everyone's voice matters, but I am speaking now. I am speaking now." After another interruption, Harris replied, "You know what? If you want Donald Trump to win, then say that. Otherwise, I'm speaking", following her statement with a "withering stare" towards the protestors. Harris supporters subsequently drowned out the protestors by cheering and chanting "Kamala", as the protestors were escorted out of the venue.


== Platform ==

Harris has framed her campaign as "a choice between freedom and chaos" and based it around the ideals of "freedom" and "the future". The Harris campaign has sought to highlight her experience as an attorney general and a prosecutor to "prosecute the case" against Trump by pointing out his 34 felony convictions. Harris is running as a moderate Democrat and has moderated several of her policy positions since her 2019 run, with many of her domestic policy stances now expected to resemble Biden's. Harris's stances will also have a particular focus on reproductive healthcare, criminal justice, and civil rights issues.
Harris's campaign has been noted for having an optimistic and joyful tone. Another aspect of Harris's campaign messaging in July focused on branding Republicans, Trump, and vice presidential nominee JD Vance as "weird" on multiple occasions. Such comments originated with Tim Walz, whom Harris later selected as her running mate, Harris, and others in the Democratic party. During a campaign fundraiser in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, Harris said, "You may have noticed, Donald Trump has been resorting to some wild lies about my record. And some of what he and his running mate are saying, well, it's just plain weird. I mean that's the box you put that in." This and the messaging shift towards "freedom" is a noted departure from Biden's focus on democracy.


=== Domestic issues ===


==== Abortion ====
Harris supports national protections for abortion, which were reversed after Roe v. Wade (1973) was overturned by Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022). Under the Biden administration, she prominently campaigned for abortion rights. In March 2024, Harris became the first sitting vice president to visit an abortion clinic, and she told Politico in July 2024 that "we need to put into law the protections of Roe".


==== Cannabis ====
Harris has publicly stated support for full federal cannabis legalization, and removing it entirely from the Controlled Substances Act. Harris-Walz is the first major party presidential ticket to do so.


==== Civil rights ====
Harris supports efforts to improve racial justice. Harris previously supported the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act. Harris has supported demilitarizing police departments, and has pushed back against calls to defund the police. Harris was tasked by Biden with protecting democracy through voting rights legislation through her work on the For the People Act. Harris has supported efforts to defend election workers and counter Republican efforts to restrict voting following the 2020 presidential election. Harris has stated her support to pass the Freedom to Vote Act and John Lewis Rights Voting Rights Advancement Act if elected.


==== Climate change and energy ====
Harris is an advocate for environmental justice to address the impact of climate change on lower-income areas and people of color. Under Biden, she supported his climate legislation. Harris helped pass the Inflation Reduction Act, the largest investment in addressing climate change and clean energy in US history putting the US on track to meet emissions reduction targets by 50–52% below 2005 levels by 2030. Harris's campaign has stated that she does not support a ban on fracking. In an interview in August 2024, Harris stated that if elected president she would not ban fracking.


==== Economy ====

Harris's economic agenda has been described as populist, with policy proposals that depart from Biden's. Harris's proposals include plans to eliminate medical debts, a ban on price gouging for groceries and food, a cap on prescription drug costs, and a $25,000 subsidy for first-time homebuyers. Harris proposes to eliminate taxes on tips and create a $6,000 child tax credit for the first year of a child's life, proposals that follow similar suggestions from her presidential competitors Trump and Vance, respectively. Harris has also pushed to raise the minimum wage, ban hidden fees and late charges from financial institutions, and limit "unfair" rent increases. Harris has opposed Trump's proposed 20% tax on imports.
The New York Times described Harris's economic policy as embracing "the idea that the federal government must act aggressively to foster competition and correct distortions in private markets." Harris has proposed raising taxes on corporations and high-earners to fund services for the lower and middle classes and reduce the deficit. Harris has also proposed tax breaks to companies delivering economic benefit, such as manufacturing technologies to fight global warming and building affordable housing. Harris has spoken in support of the middle class and labor unions. Harris has stated she supports increasing the top tier capital gains tax rate to 28%, up from 20% and lower than Biden's proposed 39.6%. Harris has stated her support for a Billionaire Minimum Income Tax, increasing the tax on stock buybacks to 4%, and a ten-fold tax reduction for small business ranging from $5,000 to $50,000 in relief. Harris has stated she supports efforts to create a tax on unrealized gains for those with more than a $100 million in net worth if they do not pay a minimum 25% tax rate on their income inclusive of unrealized gains so long as 80% of said wealth is in tradeable assets. The plan would impact a small percentage of America's wealthy, and Axios reported most tech founders and investors would be spared. Harris has also announced support for restoring the corporate tax rate to 28% among several other tax proposals to raise taxes and close loopholes for corporations and the wealthy that would bring in $5 trillion in additional revenue over 10 years.
The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget has estimated that Harris's policy proposals would increase the federal deficit by $1.7 trillion over a decade. The Tax Foundation has estimated that her proposals would cost over $2 trillion over a decade. Harris's more populist proposals, such as her proposal to end taxes on tips and ban price-gouging, have been criticized by left-leaning economists as counterproductive. Other proposals, such as raising the minimum wage and raising tax credits, have met with more support from economists. The New York Times reports that Harris's tax proposals have largely tracked Biden's, and in total add less debt burden than Trump's plans which are estimated to add $4 trillion to the debt after taxes.
Prior to her nomination, Harris promoted the passage of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, funding for small business, and supported an act as senator to provide a $6,000 tax credit for middle and low-income families.


==== Gun safety ====
Harris has made the "freedom to live safe from gun violence" an important plank of her campaign. Harris has expressed support for red flag laws, universal background checks, and a prohibition of the sale of assault weapons to civilians. As vice president, Harris oversaw the White House Office of Gun Violence Prevention.


==== Healthcare ====
Harris has supported efforts to strengthen coverage under the Affordable Care Act, including setting caps on seniors' out-of-pocket prescription drug prices at $2,000 and limiting the cost of insulin for those on Medicare to $35 enacted as part of the Inflation Reduction Act. Harris has been a proponent of White House efforts to ban medical debt from credit reports. Harris has stated she no longer supports a single-payer healthcare system.


==== Housing ====
Harris has proposed directing $40 billion in tax incentives to construction companies for building starter homes and sending $25,000 in down-payment assistance to every first-time homebuyer. Harris says she will urge Congress to enforce fair housing laws, pass a bill to bar property owners from using services that coordinate rents through the passage of the Preventing the Algorithmic Facilitation of Rental Housing Cartels Act, and pass the Stop Predatory Investing Act to remove tax benefits for Wall Street firms that buy up large numbers of single-family homes. Her proposed housing policies are among the first to bring YIMBY ideas to the national political mainstream.


==== Immigration ====
Harris has promised to fight for "strong border security" coupled with an earned pathway to citizenship. Following an August 2024 interview, Harris was described by immigration activists as positioning herself to be "tougher on immigration than Trump." Harris has highlighted her work in combating transnational gangs, drug cartels, and human traffickers while attorney general. In 2023, as vice president, Harris announced pledges of US$950 million from private companies to support Central American communities to address the causes of mass migration, such as poverty. While vice president, Harris supported a bipartisan bill, the Secure the Border Act, which would have funded additional border agents and closed the border if too crowded, and which was rejected by Trump. Trump called on House and Senate Republicans to kill the bill arguing that it would hurt his and other Republican's reelection campaigns and deny them the ability to run on immigration as a campaign issue. Harris criticized Trump for his opposition to the bill on the campaign trail, and promised to sign the bill into law as president.
Harris stated she believes the immigration system is "broken" and needs to be fixed, and that she thinks most Americans also believe this. Her campaign video introduced on July 30, 2024, says, "Kamala Harris supports increasing the number of Border Patrol agents" and paints Trump as unserious on border security.


==== LGBT rights ====

Harris is a strong supporter of LGBTQ people's rights. In 2022, President Joe Biden signed the Respect for Marriage Act, which requires states to recognize same-sex marriages and interracial marriages even as the Supreme Court took aim at marriage equality. At the signing ceremony, Harris and others gave speeches, and Biden presented Harris with a pen as recognition of years of work for marriage equality. In 2023, Harris visited the Stonewall Inn and denounced legislative attacks on transgender rights in states across the country. In July 2024, Harris conducted a fundraiser in the LGBTQ hotspot of Provincetown, Massachusetts.


==== Minimum wage ====
Harris supports raising the federal minimum wage. Harris has not given a number for a federal minimum wage she supports. She has posted on Twitter praising that some states have raised the minimum wage to at least $15 an hour.


==== Social services ====
Harris has supported the expanded child tax credit enacted in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Harris has expressed support for making child care and elder care more affordable and enacting paid family leave. Harris has also expressed support for student debt relief. On August 16, 2024, Kamala Harris announced the proposal of a $6,000 child tax credit, expanding her populist economic agenda. Other policies including expanding a cap on prescription drug costs and permanently reinstating the expanded child tax credit.


==== Supreme Court ====
Harris has supported Biden's call for term limits for Supreme Court justices and a constitutional amendment to reverse its decision in Trump v. United States (2024).


=== Foreign policy ===


==== China ====
During the 2020 vice presidential debate, Harris criticized former President Donald Trump's imposition of tariffs on Chinese imports, accusing Republicans of losing the trade war with China and losing hundreds of thousands of jobs as a result.
Harris has advocated for "de-risking" from Beijing, a policy that encourages reducing Western economic dependence on China. Harris is expected to continue deepening American alliances in Asia and the Pacific with the intention of curbing China's rising power both economically and militarily. Harris has previously spoken out against human rights abuses in Hong Kong and co-sponsored the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act and Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act. As a senator, she condemned the persecution of Uyghur and minority women in western China and sponsored Marco Rubio's sanctions punishing human rights abuses in the region, and during the 2019 debates also criticized China for stealing "our products, including our intellectual property" and for dumping "substandard products into our economy". Harris has previously stated her support of Taiwan's self-defense, criticized Chinese naval harassment of Philippine vessels, and supported freedom of navigation in the South China Sea.


==== India ====
In 2019, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi repealed Article 370, ending the semi-autonomous status of Indian-administered Kashmir. Harris rebuked the move, saying "we must remind Kashmiris that they are not alone in the world." In 2023, Harris entertained Modi at a state dinner and discussed her visiting her grandparents in Madras when she was growing up, the impact India has had on the world and their cooperation on topics like climate change, cybercrime and vaccine production.


==== Israel and Palestine ====

Harris is seen as more sympathetic to Palestinians than Biden, who has described himself as a Zionist and has a long history with Israeli leaders. Some analysts expect that Harris would continue to use a tougher tone with Israel, though U.S. policy toward Israel may not see a big shift if Harris is elected. Regarding the Israel–Hamas war, she has specifically stated that she is against placing conditions on military aid to Israel though noted that how it defends itself matters. 
Following Hamas's attack on Israel in November of 2023, Harris strongly supported Israel's offensive, stating that "the threat Hamas poses to the people of Israel must be eliminated". However, since December of 2023, she has criticized Israel's approach and the Gaza humanitarian crisis. In March 2024, Harris opposed Israel's invasion of Rafah, called for a six week pause in the attacks, and stated that the situation in Gaza is a "humanitarian catastrophe".  
Harris was described by USA Today as "coming close to accusing Israel of war crimes" in one of her speeches, when she said international humanitarian law must be respected in the conflict. Former Biden administration officials said in an interview with Politico that Harris was less committed to the Israel policy and that one official was "cautiously optimistic" she would change it. Harris declined to preside over a speech by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on July 24, instead going to a campaign event. After the speech, she condemned pro-Hamas protestors, pro-Hamas graffiti and the burning of an American flag at Union Station. The next day, after she met with Netanyahu, she said, "Israel has a right to defend itself, and how it does so matters." She continued that Israel must agree to a ceasefire and hostage deal and work towards a two-state solution, emphasizing Palestinian suffering. Before the rally, Harris had interacted with the co-founders of the Uncommitted National Movement, hearing stories from family members about the war. Harris reportedly agreed to meet with the activists, and was described by them as "sympathetic". However, Harris's national security advisor said that she did not support an embargo. Throughout August, Harris and her campaign met with Arab-American and Uncommitted leaders in metro Detroit, including Dearborn mayor Abdullah Hammoud. However, in a CNN interview, Harris denied that she would shift policy from Biden and said that she would not end arms to Israel.


==== NATO and Ukraine ====

Harris is expected and has signaled to generally follow Biden's foreign policy on NATO and Ukraine, supporting both in the aftermath of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.


==== Trade ====
While Harris described herself as "not a protectionist Democrat" during a 2019 primary debate, she has been critical of past free trade deals, stating she would have voted against the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) of 1992 and the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) of 2016; in 2020, she voted against the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA). However, trade has never been a major focus for Harris; as such, her positions are not entirely known. The Center for Strategic and International Studies notes that she has said so little about trade that most analysts have to dig up these old votes and statements and assume that she will continue Biden's policies: for instance, President Biden has maintained most of Trump's tariffs on China and increased some of them, and so likely won't make significant changes. The CATO Institute in 2020 noted that while Harris does not seem to be an economic nationalist, her terms of engagement are a bit unclear other than that she wants more labor and environmental protections.


== Endorsements ==

The Democratic Party quickly coalesced around her following Biden's withdrawal and his endorsement of Harris. The vast majority of Congressional Democrats endorsed Harris, including senior officials such as Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer, House Democratic Leader Hakeem Jeffries, and former Speaker and House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi. Additionally, all Democratic governors have endorsed Harris. On July 21, former President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton endorsed Harris. On July 26, former President Barack Obama and former First Lady Michelle Obama endorsed Harris in a joint statement. On August 3, Jimmy Carter, the oldest surviving Democratic former president, endorsed Harris.
Some disaffected Republicans, including staunch critics of former President Donald Trump, such as former Vice President Dick Cheney and his daughter, former House Representative Liz Cheney, and former federal executive officials Alberto Gonzales and Stephanie Grisham have also come forward to endorse Harris.
On September 10, 2024, American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift endorsed Harris for president in a highly publicized Instagram post, following the first debate between Harris and Republican nominee Donald Trump. Swift, explained her support for Harris and running mate Tim Walz, signing off as "Childless Cat Lady," a reference to comments made by Trump’s running mate, JD Vance, about women without children. Meanwhile, Trump’s campaign criticized the endorsement, claiming it reflected the Democratic Party's alignment with "wealthy elites."


== Vice presidential selection ==


== Polling ==

As of August 16, Harris has been shown to be narrowly leading in several general election polls and narrowly trailing in others. In addition, her favorability ratings significantly increased  among Democrats and independents in polling following her campaign launch.
An August poll by the Council on American-Islamic Relations of Muslim-Americans showed that support for Harris (29.4%) was nearly tied with Green Party nominee Jill Stein (29.1%). Harris still received nearly four times the support as Biden had in a prior poll (7.3%).


== Firsts and related events in U.S. history for Harris/Walz ==
Harris is the first woman of color to be nominated for president by a major political party; following Hillary Clinton in 2016, she is the second major party female presidential nominee.
By securing the official Democratic nomination 15 days after announcing her campaign, Harris's campaign for the Democratic nomination is the shortest-running successful campaign for the presidential nomination of either major party in modern U.S. history.
If elected president, she will become the first female president of the United States.
If elected president, she will become the first Asian-American president of the United States.
If she becomes president, she will be the first president to be in an interracial marriage.
If she becomes president, she will be the first president to have a Jewish spouse.
Should she be elected president, Harris will become the first president to have graduated from a Historically Black College or University (Howard University).
If she becomes president, she will be the first president to be a member of a Divine Nine sorority or fraternity.
She is the first Democratic presidential and vice presidential nominee to be from any Western state.
She would also become the fifth sitting vice president to be elected president, following John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, Martin Van Buren, and George H. W. Bush.
If she becomes president, she will be the fourth president from California, following Herbert Hoover, Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan.
Following Hubert Humphrey and Walter Mondale, Walz would become the third vice president from Minnesota.
If elected, Harris and Walz would be the first president and vice president to be born in the same year since Abraham Lincoln and Hannibal Hamlin.
If Walz is elected, he would be the first Nebraska native to become vice president.


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official campaign website
Financial information (Presidential campaign) at the Federal Election Commission
